Title: RECAP Project -- Privacy Policy
Slug: recap/privacy-policy/

**Note: This privacy policy is about how we protect the privacy of RECAP
users. For information about what we're doing to protect the privacy of
people who are the subject of public records, please see our [Frequently
Asked Questions]({filename}/pages/recap/faq.md).**

This privacy policy governs the following: (1) the RECAP Extension for
Firefox, Chrome or other browsers (the “RECAP Extension” or the
“Extension”); (2) the RECAP Extension Server, with which the Extension
interacts (the “RECAP Extension Server” or the “Extension Server”); (3)
the RECAP Website, located at http://www.recapthelaw.org (the “RECAP
Website” or “Website”); and (4) the RECAP Website Server (the “RECAP
Website Server” or the “Website Server”) (collectively, the “RECAP
Materials”).

YOUR USE OF THE RECAP MATERIALS CONSTITUTES YOUR AGREEMENT TO THESE
TERMS AND ANY SUBSEQUENT CHANGES TO THESE TERMS. DO NOT USE THE
EXTENSION OR THE SERVER IF YOU DO NOT AGREE WITH ALL OF THESE TERMS.

This document describes what information we collect from our users and
what we will and will not do with it. If you have any questions, do not
hesitate to email us at <info@free.law>.

### About RECAP and the Role of the Internet Archive

RECAP is a project of the Center for Information Technology Policy at
Princeton University (“CITP”).

Public records submitted by RECAP users are transmitted to the RECAP
Extension Server, which is under the control of CITP. Public records are
then transmitted to the [Internet Archive](http://www.archive.org/)
(“IA”), a 501(c)(3) non-profit tasked with building an Internet library
with permanent access for researchers, historians, and scholars to
historical collections that exist in digital format, which serves as the
ultimate repository of the public records submitted by RECAP users.
Before transmitting the public records to IA, the Extension Server
strips out all information relating to the individual RECAP user and
submits only the public record to IA.

Because IA has no control over the RECAP Materials, and because the IA
servers never receive any sensitive information about RECAP users from
the RECAP Materials, the IA servers are considered to be outside of the
RECAP system, and this privacy policy does not bind IA. Users of the
RECAP Materials may wish to review IA’s own Privacy Policy, which is
available at <http://www.archive.org/about/terms.php>.


### Uploading Public Records

The RECAP Materials help end users perform two functions: (1) upload
public records to IA; and (2) download public records from IA.

When a RECAP Extension user downloads pages containing public records
from PACER, including docket pages, “receipt” pages, and PDF files of
individual documents, a copy is automatically sent to the Extension
Server. Some of these pages may contain personally-identifiable
information such as a PACER username. Personally-identifiable
information is immediately discarded by the Extension Server and is
never saved on the Extension Server or transmitted to IA.


### Downloading Public Records

When a RECAP user downloads a public record through the Extension, the
public record is actually downloaded from IA, which serves as the
ultimate repository of the public records submitted by RECAP users.
Please note that by downloading documents through the Extension from IA,
RECAP users may be bound by IA's Terms of Use, Privacy Policy, and
Copyright Policy.


### Querying the Internet Archive

When a RECAP user conducts a search on PACER, the Extension queries the
Extension Server to determine if the user-sought public record is
publicly-available for download from IA. The Extension transmits
information about the court, case, and public record sought to the
Extension Server, which responds to the query, and then immediately
discards the information. It is neither stored on the Extension Server
nor transmitted to IA.

If a user chooses to download a document or public record directly from
IA, information may be logged by IA in accordance with IA's privacy
policy.


### Interacting with PACER

The RECAP Extension never directly interacts with the PACER servers, nor
does it store any information related to your PACER account. The
Extension does check for the existence of a “PACER cookie” or “ECF
cookie” in the user’s browser, but it does not further examine the
contents of the cookie or transmit the cookie to the RECAP Extension
Server. It does so in order to determine when you are logged in using a
public-access PACER account or an attorney ECF account so that uploads
and queries can be triggered. The RECAP Materials will not retain any
information about your PACER account on our Servers.


### Logging

The RECAP Extension Server keeps logs of all queries and uploads it
receives. The Extension Server logs the client IP address, URL, and time
of access. The Extension Server also separately logs information on the
documents uploaded, including upload time, court name, case number and
what transpired. The logs are separated to minimize the risk that
individual RECAP users’ uploads can be identified after the fact, but we
cannot guarantee that identification will be impossible.

CITP will purge the above mentioned logs after 14 days. However, CITP
reserves the right to compute standard aggregate statistics such as
total number of uploads, queries, and unique users before purging our
logs. After the 14 day period, the Extension Server will continue to
maintain a database log with the court and document information for each
public record.

RECAP Website traffic will be tracked using Google Analytics. In
addition, when users leave a reply or comment on the RECAP Website, the
name, email, url, IP address, date and time of publication, and comment
will be stored in a Website Server Log. The Website Server will also log
standard information for HTTP requests, including date, time IP address,
and URL. The Website Server Log may be kept in perpetuity.


### Disclosure of Information

CITP will not publicly display log records or client IP addresses. CITP
will not sell logs to third parties. CITP will only release logs to a
third party if compelled to do so by a court order.


### Changes

We reserve the right to change our privacy policy from time to time at
our sole discretion. Please periodically check this section to review
the current version of the Privacy Policy. Your continued use of the
RECAP Extension or the RECAP Server following the posting of such
changes will constitute your assent to all such changes.

Last Updated May 21, 2014.

**Note: You may also wish to review our [Copyright Infringement
Information]({filename}/pages/recap/dmca.md) and [Terms of
Use]({filename}/pages/recap/tos.md)**
